update the migrate page and the cheatsheet for deno future (#687)
denoland/docs: runtime/manual/node/migrate.md

title: "Migrating from Node.js to Deno"
---

One of Deno's core strengths is a unified toolchain that comes with support for
TypeScript out of the box, and tools like a linter, formatter and a test runner.
Switching to Deno allows you to simplify your toolchain and reduces the number
of moving components in your project. Deno also has a more secure runtime, with
[runtime permissions](../basics/permissions.md) that allow you to control what
your code can access.

> To migrate an existing Node.js project to Deno, there are a number of

Reviewer: The primary emphasis should be 
> Do nothing - Deno works out of the box on Node projects. There are some situations where this wont work, like if you're using CommonJS, but generally you code works out of the box.
> Deno offers ways to make your code smaller and simpler, this guide will give you details on OPTIONAL things you can undertake

Author: I've updated the intro to mention this

differences to take into account between the Node and Deno runtimes. This guide
will walk you through migrating your Node.js project to Deno.

## Module imports and exports

Deno supports [ECMAScript modules](../basics/modules/index.md) exclusively. If
your Node.js code uses
[`require`](https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html#modules-commonjs-modules), you
should update it to use `import` statements instead. If your internal code uses
CommonJS-style exports, those will also need to be updated.

A typical CommonJS-style project might look similar to this:

```js title="add_numbers.js"
module.exports = function addNumbers(num1, num2) {
  return num1 + num2;
};
```

```js title="index.js"
const addNumbers = require("./add_numbers");
console.log(addNumbers(2, 2));
```

> To convert it to [ECMAScript modules](../basics/modules/index.md), we'll make a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To convert these to [ECMAScript modules](../basics/modules/index.md), we'll make a
```

few minor changes:

```js title="add_numbers.js"
export function addNumbers(num1, num2) {
  return num1 + num2;
}
```

```js title="index.js"
import { addNumbers } from "./add_numbers.js";
console.log(addNumbers(2, 2));
```

Exports:

| CommonJS                             | ECMAScript modules                 |
| ------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------- |
| `module.exports = function add() {}` | `export default function add() {}` |
| `exports.add = function add() {}`    | `export function add() {}`         |

Imports:

| CommonJS                                   | ECMAScript modules                       |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------- |
| `const add = require("./add_numbers");`    | `import add from "./add_numbers.js";`    |
| `const { add } = require("./add_numbers")` | `import { add } from "./add_numbers.js"` |

> ### Quick fix with VSCode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Quick fix with VS Code
```

> If you are using VSCode you can use the built-in feature to convert CommonJS to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using VS Code, you can use its built-in feature to convert CommonJS to
```

ES6 modules. Right-click on the `require` statement, or the lightbulb icon and
select `Quick Fix` and then `Convert to ES module`.

![Quick Fix](../images/quick-fix.png)

### CommonJS vs ECMAScript resolution

> An important distinction between the two module systems is that ECMAScript
> resolution requires the full specifier **including the file extension** to be
> present. Omitting the file extension or having special handling of `index.js` is
> a feature unique to CommonJS. The benefit of the ECMAScript resolution is that
> it works the same across the browser, Deno and other runtimes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An important distinction between the two module systems is that ECMAScript
resolution requires the full specifier **including the file extension**. Omitting 
the file extension, and special handling of `index.js`, are features unique to 
CommonJS. The benefit of the ECMAScript resolution is that it works the same 
across the browser, Deno, and other runtimes.
```

## Runtime permissions in Deno

> Consider the following simple [express](https://expressjs.com/) server:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider the following simple [Express](https://expressjs.com/) server:
```

```

> If you run it with `deno run server.js`, it would prompt you for a number of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you run the above with `deno run server.js`, you would be prompted for a number of
```

> permissions required to execute the code and its dependencies. DENO SECURE BY

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
permissions required to execute the code and its dependencies. DENO IS SECURE BY
```

Reviewer 3: Oops I think this was more of a placeholder that we forgot to fill out 😅

that you as the developer must opt in to giving your code access to the
filesystem, network, system environment, and more. Doing this prevents supply
chain attacks and other potential vulnerabilities in your code. By comparison,
Node.js has no concept of runtime security, with all code executed with the same
level of permission as the user running the code.

To run your code like it would in Node.js, you can pass the `-A` flag to enable
all permissions.

```sh
deno run -A server.js
```

For more granular permissions you can enable access to specific features by
opting into [permission individually](../basics/permissions.md).

## Running scripts from `package.json`

You can continue to use your existing npm scripts with Deno, by using the
[`deno task`](../tools/task_runner.md) subcommand. Consider the following
Node.js project with a script called `start` inside its `package.json`.

```json title="package.json"
{
  "name": "my-project",
  "scripts": {
    "start": "eslint"
  }
}
```

You can execute this script with Deno by running:

```sh
deno task start
```

## Node.js global objects

In Node.js, there are a number of

> [global objects](https://nodejs.org/api/globals.html) that are available in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[global objects](https://nodejs.org/api/globals.html) available in the
```

> scope of all programs, like the `process` object, `Buffer` or `__dirname` and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scope of all programs, like the `process` object, `Buffer`, or `__dirname` and
```

`__filename`.

Deno does not add additional objects and variables to the global scope, other
than the [`Deno` global](../runtime/builtin_apis.md). Any API that doesn't exist

> as a web standard browser API will be found on `Deno`, or you can import Node.js

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as a web-standard browser API will be found in `Deno`. Alternatively, you can import Node.js
```

built-in modules using the `node:` specifier.

```js
import process from "node:process";
import { Buffer } from "node:buffer";

const __filename = import.meta.filename;
const __dirname = import.meta.dirname;
```

:::note

If you do run into a problem with Node.js compatibility, please let us know by
[opening an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/denoland/deno/issues).

:::

> ## Optional improvements - Deno.json

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Optional improvements - deno.json
```

Deno has its own config file, `deno.json` or `deno.jsonc`, which can be used to
configure your project. You can use it to define tasks, dependencies, path
mappings, and other runtime configurations.

### Migrating npm scripts to `deno.json`

> If preferred, you can move your npm scripts over to `deno.json` to manage your
> project's runtime configuration. This allows you to run all of the necessary
> permission flags and other runtime config in one place, which can then be run
> with `deno task`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If preferred, you can move your npm scripts over to `deno.json`, where they can
be run using `deno task`. This allows you to manage all necessary permission flags 
and other runtime configuration in one place.
```

```json
{
  "tasks": {
    "dev": "deno run --allow-net --allow-read --allow-env server.js"
  }
}
```

```sh
deno task dev
```

### Migrating npm dependencies to `deno.json`

> You can also migrate your dependencies over to `deno.json` to manage your
> project's dependencies. Deno supports importing dependencies from external
> package repositories, local files and urls. To import your npm dependencies, you
> can add them to the `imports` field in `deno.json`, and add the `npm:` specifier
> to the import path:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also migrate your dependencies over to `deno.json`. Deno supports 
importing dependencies from external package repositories, local files, and/or
URLs. To import your npm dependencies, you can add them to the `imports` field
in `deno.json`, and add the `npm:` specifier to the import path:
```

```json
{
  "imports": {
    "express": "npm:express@4"
  }
}
```

Deno supports multiple package registries and allows you to import dependencies
from npm, [JSR](https://jsr.io) and HTTP URLs.

```json
{
  "imports": {
    "express": "npm:express@4",
    "@luca/cases": "jsr:@luca/cases@1",
    "foo": "https://example.com/foo.ts"
  }
}
```

## Optional improvements - Linting

> Deno ships with a built-in linter that is written with performance in mind. It
> can lint large projects in a few milliseconds. You can try it out on your
> project by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deno ships with a built-in linter that is written with performance in mind. Deno
can lint large projects in just a few milliseconds. You can try it out on your
project by running:
```

```sh
deno lint
```

> This will lint all files in your project. When the linter detects a problem, it
> will show it in your editor and in the terminal output. An example of what that
> might look like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will lint all files in your project. When the linter detects a problem, it
will show the lien in your editor and in the terminal output. An example of what that
might look like:
```

```sh
error[no-constant-condition]: Use of a constant expressions as conditions is not allowed.
 --> /my-project/bar.ts:1:5
  | 
1 | if (true) {
  |     ^^^^
  = hint: Remove the constant expression

  docs: https://lint.deno.land/rules/no-constant-condition

Found 1 problem
Checked 4 files
```

> Many linting rules come with the ability to fix the detected issues
> automatically when passing the `--fix` flag.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many linting issues can be fixed automatically by passing the `--fix` flag:
```

```sh
deno lint --fix
```

A full list of all supported linting rules can be found on
[https://lint.deno.land/](https://lint.deno.land/). To learn more about how to
configure the linter, check out the [`deno lint` subcommand](../tools/linter/).

## Optional improvements - Formatting

> Another optional improvement you can make is to format your code with Deno. Deno
> ships with a [built-in formatter](../tools/formatter/) that can format your code
> according to the Deno style guide. You can run the formatter on your project by
> running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deno ships with a [built-in formatter](../tools/formatter/) that can format your code
according to the Deno style guide. You can run the formatter on your project by
running:
```

```sh
deno fmt
```

> On your CI you can run the formatter with the `--check` argument, to make it
> exit with an error code when the code is not formatted properly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If using `deno fmt` in CI, you can pass the `--check` argument to make the formatter
exit with an error when it detects improperly formatted code.
```

```sh
deno fmt --check
```

The formatting rules can be configured in your `deno.json` file. To learn more
about how to configure the formatter, check out the
[`deno fmt` subcommand](../tools/formatter/).

## Optional improvements - Testing

Deno encourages writing tests for your code, and provides a built-in test runner
to make it easy to write and run tests. The test runner is tightly integrated
into Deno, so that you don't have to do any additional configuration to make
TypeScript or other features work.

```ts title="my_test.ts"
Deno.test("my test", () => {
  // Your test code here
});
```

```sh
deno test
```

When passing the `--watch` flag, the test runner will automatically reload when
any of the imported modules change.

> To learn more about the test runner and how to configure it check out the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To learn more about the test runner and how to configure it, check out the
```
